NUT-20: signature on mint request (#188)
cashubtc/nuts: 19.md

      "B_": "035015e6d7ade60ba8426cefaf1832bbd27257636e44a76b922d78e79b47cb689d"
    },
    {
      "amount": 2,
      "id": "009a1f293253e41e",
      "B_": "0288d7649652d0a83fc9c966c969fb217f15904431e61a44b14999fabc1b5d9ac6"
    }
  ],
  "witness": "d9be080b33179387e504bb6991ea41ae0dd715e28b01ce9f63d57198a095bccc776874914288e6989e97ac9d255ac667c205fa8d90a211184b417b4ffdd24092"

}'
```

Response of `Bob`:

```json
{
  "signatures": [
    {
      "id": "009a1f293253e41e",
      "amount": 2,
      "C_": "0224f1c4c564230ad3d96c5033efdc425582397a5a7691d600202732edc6d4b1ec"
    },
    {
      "id": "009a1f293253e41e",
      "amount": 8,
      "C_": "0277d1de806ed177007e5b94a8139343b6382e472c752a74e99949d511f7194f6c"
    }
  ]
}
```

If the invoice was not paid yet, `Bob` responds with an error. In that case, `Alice` **CAN** repeat the same request until the Lightning invoice is settled, as in NUT04. If `Alice` does not include a witness on the `PostMintBolt11Request` but did include a `pubkey` in the `PostMintBolt11QuoteRequest` the `Bob` **MUST** respond with an error, `Alice` **CAN** repeat the request with a witness in order to mint the ecash.

## Settings

> The settings for this NUT indicate the support for requiring a signature before minting. They are part of the info response of the mint ([NUT-06][06]) which in this case reads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The settings for this NUT indicate the support for requiring a signature before minting. They are part of the info response of the mint ([NUT-06](06.md)) which in this case reads
```

Reviewer 2: Another way how to fix the issue is to add the following at the end of the file:

```
[06]: 06.md
```

This seems to be preferred way used in other documents.

# Mint quote

To request a mint quote, the wallet of `Alice` makes a `POST /v1/mint/quote/{method}` request where `method` is the payment method requested (here `bolt11`).

```http
POST https://mint.host:3338/v1/mint/quote/bolt11
```

The wallet of `Alice` includes the following `PostMintQuoteBolt11Request` data in its request:

```json
{
  "amount": <int>,
  "unit": <str_enum["sat"]>,
  "description": <str|null>,
  "pubkey": <str|null> <-- New
}
```

with the requested `amount` and the `unit`. An optional `description` can be passed if the mint signals support for it in `MintMethodSetting`. `pubkey` is the public key that will be required for signature verification during the minting process. The mint will only mint ecash after receiving a valid signature from the corresponding private key in the `PostMintRequest`.

> **Privacy:** To prevent linking multiple mint quotes together, wallets **SHOULD** generate a unique public key for each mint quote request

The mint `Bob` then responds with a `PostMintQuoteBolt11Response`:

```json
{
  "quote": <str>,
  "request": <str>,
  "state": <str_enum[STATE]>,

>   "expiry": <int>

Reviewer 3: We should probably return the `pubkey` here as well (so that it's clear that the quote is locked)

}
```

Where `quote` is the quote ID and `request` is the payment request to fulfill. `expiry` is the Unix timestamp until which the mint quote is valid.
`state` is an enum string field with possible values `"UNPAID"`, `"PAID"`, `"ISSUED"`:

- `"UNPAID"` means that the quote's request has not been paid yet.
- `"PAID"` means that the request has been paid.
- `"ISSUED"` means that the quote has already been issued.

## Example

Request of `Alice` with curl:

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:3338/v1/mint/quote/bolt11 -d '{"amount": 10, "unit": "sat", "pubkey": "03d56ce4e446a85bbdaa547b4ec2b073d40ff802831352b8272b7dd7a4de5a7cac"}' -H "Content-Type: application/json"
```

Response of `Bob`:

```json
{
  "quote": "9d745270-1405-46de-b5c5-e2762b4f5e00",
  "request": "lnbc100n1pj4apw9...",
  "state": "UNPAID",

>   "expiry": 1701704757

Reviewer 3: We would also return `pubkey` here if we did above.

}
```

#### Message aggregation

To provide a signature for a mint request, the owner of one of the signing public keys must concatenate the `PostMintQuoteBolt11Response.quote` and the `B_` fields of all `BlindedMessages` (outputs, see [NUT-00][00]) to a single message string in the order they appear in the `PostMintRequest`. This string concatenated is then hashed and signed (see [Signature scheme](#signature-scheme)).

If a request has `n` outputs the message to sign becomes:

```

> msg =  quote_id || B_0 || ... || B_n

Reviewer: me and calle were discussing whether it should be better to just JSON-serialize the entire payload and then use the utf-8 encoding of the `quote_id` and the entire serialized payload.

I'm fine with either approach what do you think?

Reviewer: For reference how I am doing it right now in my Nutshell branch (before having seen this):

```python
sigbytes = bytes.fromhex(signature)
serialized_outputs = b"".join([o.json().encode("utf-8") for o in outputs])
msgbytes = quote.quote.encode("utf-8") + serialized_outputs
```

Reviewer 3: > calle and I were discussing whether it should be better to just JSON-serialize the entire payload and then use the utf-8 encoding of the `quote_id` and the entire serialized payload.

I think that was a misunderstanding. I was wondering if we should serialize the outputs as hex to bytes or as utf-8. I believe it would be more coherent to use utf-8 here so we can use the same encoding as for the quote ID. That's what I thought we refer to when we said "serialize as json".

i.e.

```python
serialized_outputs = b"".join([o.B_.encode("utf-8") for o in outputs])
msgbytes = quote.quote.encode("utf-8") + serialized_outputs
```

Author: Is `o.B_` here the hex encoding?

Author: ```
    /// Constructs the message to be signed according to NUT-19 specification.
    ///
    /// The message is constructed by concatenating (as UTF-8 encoded bytes):
    /// 1. The quote ID (as UTF-8)
    /// 2. All blinded secrets (B_0 through B_n) converted to hex strings (as UTF-8)
    ///
    /// Format: `quote_id || B_0 || B_1 || ... || B_n`
    /// where each component is encoded as UTF-8 bytes
    pub fn msg_to_sign(&self) -> Vec<u8> {
        // Pre-calculate capacity to avoid reallocations
        let capacity = self.quote.len() + (self.outputs.len() * 66);
        let mut msg = Vec::with_capacity(capacity);
        msg.append(&mut self.quote.clone().into_bytes()); // String.into_bytes() produces UTF-8
        for output in &self.outputs {
            // to_hex() creates a hex string, into_bytes() converts it to UTF-8 bytes
            msg.append(&mut output.blinded_secret.to_hex().into_bytes());
        }
        msg
    }
```

Author: f866a2511c160870c0e250df176c595001b6d481

```

Here, `||` denotes string concatenation. The `B_` of each output is **a hex string**.

#### Signature scheme

> To mint a quote where a public key was provided, the minter needs to include signatures in the `PostMintBolt11Request`. We use `libsecp256k1`'s serialized 64-byte Schnorr signatures on the SHA256 hash of the message to sign as defined above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mint a quote where a public key was provided, the minter needs to include signatures in the `PostMintBolt11Request`. We use a [BIP340](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0340.mediawiki) signature on the SHA-256 hash of the message to sign as defined above.
```
Also why hash it again if everything that goes into the schnorr signature is hashed anyway?

Author: > Also why hash it again if everything that goes into the schnorr signature is hashed anyway?

I used the wording from NUT-11. Its only hashed once maybe that wording is confusing and should be removed?

Reviewer: So yea I've also seen this other times in the NUTs. I personally think it's not needed but for the sake of consistency let's leave it like this. (Also we cannot change NUT-11 without breaking a lot of implementations)

Author: Yeah I think its best this and NUT-11 match.

The mint `Bob` then responds with a `PostMintBolt11Response`:

```json
{
  "signatures": <Array[BlindSignature]>
}
```

where `signatures` is an array of blind signatures on the outputs.

## Example

Request of `Alice` with curl:

```bash
curl -X POST https://mint.host:3338/v1/mint/bolt11 -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d \
'{
  "quote": "9d745270-1405-46de-b5c5-e2762b4f5e00",
  "outputs": [
    {
      "amount": 8,
      "id": "009a1f293253e41e",
      "B_": "035015e6d7ade60ba8426cefaf1832bbd27257636e44a76b922d78e79b47cb689d"
    },
    {
      "amount": 2,
      "id": "009a1f293253e41e",
      "B_": "0288d7649652d0a83fc9c966c969fb217f15904431e61a44b14999fabc1b5d9ac6"
    }
  ],
  "witness": "d9be080b33179387e504bb6991ea41ae0dd715e28b01ce9f63d57198a095bccc776874914288e6989e97ac9d255ac667c205fa8d90a211184b417b4ffdd24092"

}'
```

Response of `Bob`:

```json
{
  "signatures": [
    {
      "id": "009a1f293253e41e",
      "amount": 2,
      "C_": "0224f1c4c564230ad3d96c5033efdc425582397a5a7691d600202732edc6d4b1ec"
    },
    {
      "id": "009a1f293253e41e",
      "amount": 8,
      "C_": "0277d1de806ed177007e5b94a8139343b6382e472c752a74e99949d511f7194f6c"
    }
  ]
}
```

> If the invoice was not paid yet, `Bob` responds with an error. In that case, `Alice` **CAN** repeat the same request until the Lightning invoice is settled, as in NUT04. If `Alice` does not include a witness on the `PostMintBolt11Request` but did include a `pubkey` in the `PostMintBolt11QuoteRequest` the `Bob` **MUST** respond with an error, `Alice` **CAN** repeat the request with a witness in order to mint the ecash.

Reviewer 4: nit: I think it's best to stick to the [RFC 2219](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119) keywords and definitions (i.e., **CAN** -> **MAY** or in this case **SHOULD**?).

We use **CAN** (or even can) many times elsewhere so this is by no means a blocking comment, but it's something I noticed in the spec that we **SHOULD** ( :wink: ) cleanup.

Author: Good catch I thought CAN was a keyword.

    }
  ]
}
```

If the invoice was not paid yet, `Bob` responds with an error. In that case, `Alice` **MAY** repeat the same request until the Lightning invoice is settled, as in NUT04. If `Alice` does not include a signature on the `PostMintBolt11Request` but did include a `pubkey` in the `PostMintBolt11QuoteRequest` then `Bob` **MUST** respond with an error, `Alice` **SHOULD** repeat the request with a signature in order to mint the ecash.

## Settings

The settings for this NUT indicate the support for requiring a signature before minting. They are part of the info response of the mint ([NUT-06][06]) which in this case reads

```json
{
  "19": {
    "supported": <bool>,
    "required": <bool>
  }
}
```

In addition to signaling optional support, the mint can require a public key for mint quotes and a corresponding signature during minting. If `required` is set to `true` in the NUT-19 settings:

1. The wallet **MUST** provide a public key when requesting a mint quote
2. The wallet **MUST** provide a valid witness signature when submitting the mint request

> **Note:** Enabling this setting makes the mint incompatible with wallets that do not support NUT-19

[00]: 00.md

> [06]: 06.md

Author: I think we can remove the required flag here. Leaving it up to wallets to choose to use it or not for NUT04 and future nuts that want to require it (eg bolt12) can specify that there.
